initial public doc for Distant JS 1.1 (#2)
Kandy-IO/kandy-distant-js: how-it-works/distant-protocol.md

# Distant Protocol

> In order to accommodate the different types of communications that Distant allows we define a flexible layered protocol. This protocol will be extensible in the future and allow enough flexibility for applications to overlay their own protocol on top of the base protocols.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to accommodate the different types of communications that Distant allows we define a flexible layered protocol. This protocol will be extensible in the future and allow enough flexibility for applications to overlay their own protocol on top of the base protocol.
```

## Layer 0 - Packetization

The packetization layer allows for packets of data to be split over the channel and re-assembled later. This is needed since we can deal with big packets such as WebRTC SDP packets, or big files needing to be transferred from one side to the other.

### Citrix Channel

This protocol definition makes assumptions about the underlying channel being used for communication.

> In this case the channel being used is a simple byte-channel provided by Citrix Virtual Channel that allows us to write and read data on the channel. This channel already provides the capability of packetization where individual packets are always guaranteed delivered whole and in the correct order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case the channel being used is a simple byte-channel provided by the Citrix Virtual Channel SDK that allows us to write and read data. This channel already provides the capability of packetization of individual packets up to a certain size. These packets are always guaranteed delivered whole and in the correct order.
```

Reviewer: I'm only mentioning "up to a certain size" because I don't want the customer to think that this packetization can replace the packetization that we do. Perhaps we can revisit this wording.

### Concatenation Grammar

The packetization layer is very simple and is described below in ABNF ([RFC 5234](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5234)) grammar.

```abnf
total-packets = 4*OCTET
               ; The total number of packets will be sent
               ; over the wire, including the initialPacket below

initial-packet-header = total-packets

initial-packet-body = 1*4992OCTET
                    ; The remaining space of the initialPacket for data

initial-packet = initial-packet-header initial-packet-body
                ; The first packet sent over the wire, it includes
                ; information in the header

packet = 1*4996OCTET
         ; A packet is what will be sent over the wire
         ; following the initialPacket, it is only data
         ; and does not have a header

data = initial-packet-body *packet
```

Example with packets of size 8 bytes:

```abnf
packet-one = '0' '0' '0' '4' "hell"
             ; The header of 0004 indicates that there are
             ; four packets in total in this piece of data

packet-two = "o beauti"

packet-three = "ful worl"

packet-four = "d!"

data = "hello beautiful world!"

```

### Performance considerations

> The simple protocol above might have some performance issues that have to lookout for. Since it relies on sending a fragmented packet all together (no interweaving of packets), it means that a large packet could monopolize the channel resources for an extended period of time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The simple protocol above might have some performance issues. Since it relies on sending a fragmented packet all together (no interweaving of packets), it means that a large packet could monopolize channel resources for an extended period of time.
```

We might need to roll-up packet interweaving, prioritization queues, etc. This should not be done initially but instead based on performance testing.

## Layer 1 - Distant Protocol

### Introduction

The distant protocol uses Google's Protocol Buffers to define messages that are passed back and forth between a Distant Controller and a remote Distant Session.

### Protocol Buffer Definition

The section below is a copy of the distant.proto file in the `@distant/distant-protocol` package. In case of differences, the one in the package is the official one.

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

// Note: Please note that depending on languages, the names of fields might be modified after they have been
// converted to that language. For example in JavaScript, most libraries will convert the fields
// from snake_case to camelCase.

package distant;

// ==== Session Messages ====
// Sessions correspond to a single browser session being controlled remotely.

/**

>  * Start a session with the corresponding id and entry_url.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Start a session with the corresponding id and target_url.
```

 *

>  * Once started, the session will attempt to open the entry_url in order to load the remote

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Once started, the session will attempt to open the target_url in order to load the remote
```

 * application. The controller may support the distant file access protocol, and in such circumstances
 * a URL using the `distant` scheme will attempt to load the file from the
 *
 * The id can be used by controllers to track sessions or simply for debugging purposes.
 *
 * A SessionStart will trigger one or more corresponding SessionEvents to inform of the
 * current status of the session.
 */
message SessionStart {
  int32 id = 1;         // Id for a session

>   string entry_url = 2; // The entry point of a session, this points to a URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  string target_url = 2; // The entry point of a session, this points to a URL.
```

}

/**
 * Stop a session.
 *
 * Once the session is stopped, the controller will receive on last update that the session
 * has been stopped.
 */
 message SessionStop {
  int32 id = 1;
}

/**
 * The different statuses that a session can be in.
 */
enum SessionStatus {
  UNKNOWN = 0; // The initial state of the session.
  READY = 1;   // The session has been established and is ready to receive additional messages.
  ERROR = 2;    // The session has ended because of an error.
  CLOSED = 3;  // The session was ended successfully without error.
}

/**
 * State information of a session
 */
message SessionInfo {
  int32 id = 1;                     // Id of the session

>   string entry_url = 2;             // Entry point url of a session

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  string target_url = 2;             // Entry point url of a session
```

                                    // - 500 : Browser operation which was triggered by a request has failed.
                                    // - HTTP status codes: See here (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_HTTP_status_codes)
                                    // - chromium error codes: See here (https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:net/base/net_error_list.h;drc=bad98f27515a6b830f87013c236bc6463c19ff08;l=147)
}

/**
 * An event that informs the controller of a state change in the session. This can be
 * sent in response to a command or unsolicited.
 */
message SessionEvent {
  int32 id = 1;                           // Id of the session.
  distant.SessionInfo prev_state = 2;     // The previous session state.
  distant.SessionInfo current_state = 3;  // The current session state.
}

/**
 * Send a custom message to the session or from the session. This allows applications
 * to overlay other protocols on top of the distant protocol.
 */
message SessionMessage {
  int32 id = 1;           // Id of the session.
  bytes payload = 2;      // The opaque payload of the message.
}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

/**
 * Heartbeat
 */
 message Heartbeat {
  int32 id = 1;        // Id of the session.
  uint32 sequence = 2; // The heartbeat sequence number
}

```

Author: Heartbeat is not yet coded in the javascript even if it was added to the protocol.

//==== Top Level Aggregate Messages ====

/**
 * Union of all the operations that can be performed on a remote from a controller.
 */

> message Operation {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
message Operation {
  oneof payload {
    distant.SessionStart    start           = 1;
    distant.SessionStop     stop            = 2;
    distant.SessionUpdate   update          = 3;
    distant.SessionMessage  custom_message  = 4;
    distant.SessionEvent    event           = 5;
    distant.Heartbeat       heartbeat       = 6;
  };
}
```

Reviewer: If you accept this suggestion, please remove the rest of the code below (GitHub wasn't grabbing it entirely)

  oneof payload {
    distant.SessionStart start = 1;
    distant.SessionStop stop = 2;
    distant.SessionMessage custom_message = 4;
    distant.SessionEvent event = 5;
  };
}
```

### Operation Messages

Each message of the protocol is sent within an envelope message called `Operation`. This allows receivers to determine the type of message sent as protobuf messages are not self-describing.

Here is an example of a start session message when translated to a JavaScript format:

```javascript
const startSessionMessage = {
  start: {
    id: 1,
    // Note that bellow we use the camel case version of the field. This is a standard
    // behavior for protobuf.js framework.

>     targetUrl: 'https://myremote.org'

Reviewer: This seems right. `targetUrl` for `target_url`

  }
}
```

### Control Behaviour

The protocol is also defined with a certain mandated behaviour of message-response control sequences. Here is a list of all these sequences.

#### 1. Starting a session

##### 1.1 - Successful Start

Here we show the control sequence of starting a session successfully.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram

participant Controller
participant Remote as Remote Agent

> Controller->>Remote: SessionStart { id: 1 , entry_url: 'https://myremoteapp.com' }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Controller->>Remote: SessionStart { id: 1 , targetUrl: 'https://myremoteapp.com' }
```

Reviewer: Look right? target_url but camelCase?

activate Remote
alt Session doesn't exist
Remote->Session: create
activate Session
Session-->Remote: session
deactivate Session
Remote->>Controller: SessionEvent { id: 1, prev_state, current_state }
deactivate Remote
end

```

The `prev_state` and `current_state` will have the following information for a successful creation:

```javascript
prev_state = {
  id: 1,

>   entry_url: '',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  targetUrl: '',
```

  status: UNKNOWN,
  error: ''
}

current_state = {
  id: 1,

>   entry_url: 'https://myremoteapp.com',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  targetUrl: 'https://myremoteapp.com',
```

  status: READY,
  error: ''
}
```

##### 1.2 - Start an already existing session

The id of a session is determined by the session creator. As such it's possible to attempt creating a session with the same id. In that case, the remote should simply respond with a prev_state that shows the session was already created.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram

> Controller->>Remote: SessionStart { id: 1 , entry_url: 'https://myremoteapp.com' }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Controller->>Remote: SessionStart { id: 1 , targetUrl: 'https://myremoteapp.com' }
```

activate Remote
alt Session already exists
Remote->>Controller: SessionEvent { id: 1, prev_state, current_state }
deactivate Remote
end

```

The `prev_state` and `current_state` will have the following information for a session that was already started.

```javascript
prev_state = {
  id: 1,

>   entry_url: 'https://myremoteapp.com',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  targetUrl: 'https://myremoteapp.com',
```

  status: READY,
  error: ''
}

current_state = {
  id: 1,

>   entry_url: 'https://myremoteapp.com',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  targetUrl: 'https://myremoteapp.com',
```

  status: READY,
  error: ''
}
```

##### 1.3 - Failure to start a session

When creating a session, it's possible that this process doesn't succeed for a variety of reasons. In such a case, the remote should respond with an event that describes the error.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram

> Controller->>Remote: SessionStart { id: 1 , entry_url: 'https://myremoteapp.com' }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Controller->>Remote: SessionStart { id: 1 , targetUrl: 'https://myremoteapp.com' }
```

activate Remote
alt Session doesn't exist
Remote->>Session: create
activate Session
Session-->>Remote: ! error !
deactivate Session
Remote->>Controller: SessionEvent { id: 1, prev_state, current_state }
deactivate Remote
end

```

The `prev_state` and `current_state` will have the following information for a session that failed to be created.

```javascript
prev_state = {
  id: 1,

>   entry_url: '',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  targetUrl: '',
```

  status: UNKNOWN,
  error: ''
}

current_state = {
  id: 1,

>   entry_url: '',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  targetUrl: '',
```

  status: ERROR,
  error: 'The session failed to be created because of some reason'
}
```

#### 2. Stopping a Session

##### 2.1 - Successfully stopping an existing session

Here we show the control sequence of stopping a session successfully.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
Controller->>Remote: SessionStop { id: 1 }
activate Remote
alt Session exists
Remote->Session: Cleanup
activate Session
Session-->Remote: Cleanup succesful
deactivate Session
Remote->>Controller: SessionEvent { id: 1, prev_state, current_state }
deactivate Remote
end

```

The `prev_state` and `current_state` will have the following information for a successful session stop:

```javascript
prev_state = {
  id: 1,

>   entry_url: 'https://myremoteapp.com',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  targetUrl: 'https://myremoteapp.com',
```

  status: READY,
  error: ''
}

current_state = {
  id: 1,

>   entry_url: '',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  targetUrl: '',
```

  status: CLOSED,
  error: ''
}
```

##### 2.2 - Stopping a session that doesn't exist

When attempting to stop a session that doesn't exist, the protocol simply reports the before and after state of the session with the id. In this case, it doesn't know any session with this id.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram

Controller->>Remote: SessionStop { id: 1 }
activate Remote
alt Session doesn't exist
Remote->>Controller: SessionEvent { id: 1, prev_state, current_state }
deactivate Remote
end
```

The `prev_state` and `current_state` will have the following information for a successful session stop:

```javascript
prev_state = {
  id: 1,

>   entry_url: '',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  targetUrl: '',
```

  status: UNKNOWN,
  error: ''
}

current_state = {
  id: 1,

>   entry_url: '',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  targetUrl: '',
```

  status: UNKNOWN,
  error: ''
}
```

##### 2.3 - Failing to stop a session

> When attempting to stop a session, but something goes wrong in the cleanup, the remote side should respond with some information about the failure. The session is still considered to be closed in such a scenario and messages can no longer be passed for this session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If something goes wrong while attempting to stop a session, the remote side should respond with some information about the failure. The session is still considered closed in such a scenario and messages can no longer be passed to this session.
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram

Controller->>Remote: SessionStop { id: 1 }
activate Remote
alt Session exists
Remote->Session: Cleanup
activate Session
Session-->Remote: Cleanup Failed
deactivate Session
Remote->>Controller: SessionEvent { id: 1, prev_state, current_state }
deactivate Remote
end
```

The `prev_state` and `current_state` will have the following information for a successful session stop:

```javascript
prev_state = {
  id: 1,

>   entry_url: 'https://myremoteapp.com',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  targetUrl: 'https://myremoteapp.com',
```

  status: READY,
  error: ''
}

current_state = {
  id: 1,

>   entry_url: '',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  targetUrl: '',
```

  status: CLOSED,
  error: 'Failed to properly cleanup session because of some reason'
}
```

#### 3 - Session Update

Session update is now deprecated

#### 4 - Session events

The remote will keep the controller informed of any state changes for any session it manages. It will do so by sending unsolicited events when this state changes.

##### 4.1 - An error occurred and a session has ended

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram

participant Controller
participant Remote
participant Session

Session->>Remote: Session crashed
Remote->>Controller: SessionEvent { id: 1, prev_state, current_state }

```

Here is an example for the values of prev_state and current_state:

```javascript
prev_state = {
  id: 1,

>   entry_url: 'https://myremoteapp.com',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  targetUrl: 'https://myremoteapp.com',
```

  status: READY,
  error: ''
}

current_state = {
  id: 1,

>   entry_url: '',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  targetUrl: '',
```

  status: ERROR,
  error: 'Session ended because of an unknown error'
}
```

> > Note: An ERROR or CLOSED status always means that the session is ended and can no longer be reached. CLOSED is used when the session was closed as result of a normal user operation, ERROR is used in other cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: An ERROR or CLOSED status always means that the session is ended and can no longer be reached. CLOSED is used when the session was closed as result of a normal user operation, and ERROR is used in other cases.
```
